Hello there! This course aims to teach you the principles of multi threading within the context of modern C++.
By modern C++,
I mean the language after the big changes that were made to it in 2011. I thought it would be a good
idea before we get into the multi threading to review the aspects of modern C++ we use in this course.
So if you haven't seen them before or if you want to revise them, I hope you find this helpful.
If you know it all already, then you can just skip over it.
Obviously, this is going to be a very brief treatment and we're just going to cover part of modern
C++.
If you want a detailed coverage, I recommend my course "Learn Advanced Modern C++".
The first thing we're going to look at is universal initialization. This means we can use the same
syntax for initializing any type of variable, for example, with a built in type, int x.
Then we use a pair of curly braces after the variable name and we put the initial value inside the braces.
So this is going to create a variable x, type int, with initial value
seven. For a class type such as the standard string it is exactly the same.
We have the type, then the variable name, then curly braces containing the initial value.
So this will create a string variable "s", with the initial value "let us begin" and then if we print
them out, we should see, yes, we do, we do get those values.
So this form of initialization can be used with any type.
It also prevents what are called narrowing conversions.
For example, if we have an int and we try to initialize it with a double, then in that case the double
is being narrowed down.
It's going to be truncated to seven.
So some compilers might give a warning for this, but they can't give an error.
And when we compile it, we get "conversion from double to int, possible loss of data".
I don't know if you can see that, it's rather small, but it is there. It is easily overlooked.
And you see that the value of y has been truncated to seven. if we use the new syntax.
Then we get an error and you can't ignore that.
We can also use this syntax for initializing with multiple values, for example, we can initialize
all the elements in a vector.
So this will create a vector v of int whose elements are four, two, three, five and one.
We can also, as an example, initialize a string using individual characters and then when we print them
out.
There we are: four, two, three, five one, and the string is "hello".
The next feature is the nullptr keyword. This represents the null pointer.
It's designed to have a type which is compatible with any pointer, but not with anything else.
I'll just comment that code out for a minute.
I've got two functions here which are overloaded.
One takes an inch and the other takes pointer to inch.
So if we call this with nullptr, we always get the version which takes a pointer. Yup.
With NULL, on the other hand, this is a preprocessor macro. It is defined as having the value zero,
but its type is not specified.
So you'll get different results depending on the compiler.
Let's see what we get with visual C++.
So visual C++ thinks it's an int.
I tried the same code out with some other compilers. clang thinks
it is a pointer and GCC refuses to compile it.
It says it is ambiguous.
So in that case, neither type works.
Another feature is the chrono library. This provides some types to represent time points and durations.
In this course, we're only interested in the durations, the time intervals.
So this defines some types in the std::chrono namespace.
Seconds means multiples of one second, milliseconds means thousandths of a second and microseconds means
millionths of a second.
So we can create a value, second brackets two. This will represent an interval of two seconds.
Milliseconds, twenty is twenty milliseconds and microseconds, 50 is 50 microseconds.
Modern C++ allows the user to define their own literals, and in C++ 14, the language provided some
useful ones.
There's a string literal, so you can have a string literal, which is of type string and not an array
of char.
There are literals for distances and also literals for time intervals.
These are defined in the literals namespace, the ones for string are in std::string colon colon literals
namespace and so on.
These are all inline name spaces, which is another modern C++ feature.
It means you can just use the std::literals namespace and you'll pull all these in.
So we have some suffixes, if we put "s" after the number two, this means an interval of two seconds.
So this is fully equivalent to the seconds that we had in the previous slide.
This one here. 20ms is 20 milliseconds and 50us is 50 microseconds.
One of the most important features of modern C++ is the auto type specifier. When we use auto instead of
a type, the compiler will deduce the type and fill it in for us.
For example, if we have auto x curly braces six, the compiler will look at six and deduce that this
is an inct, therefore x will have type int.
So this will produce exactly the same code as if we'd written int x curly braces six.
Where this comes in useful is if we're working with complicated types, for example, iterators to containers.
If we have a vector of string and we call the begin member function the return type from that,
if we write it out properly, we have to do vector angle bracket string, colon colon iterator.
But in modern C++, we can just put auto and the compiler will fill in the correct type.
In fact, in modern C++,
there are some situations where the type cannot be known by the programmer because it is something that is
generated internally by the compiler.
If we want to create a variable of that type, the only possibility is to use auto.
One situation where auto comes in really useful is in loops. So we have a vector, then we have a
loop which goes through every element in the container and adds two to it.
And then we print out the elements from the vector.
So let's see what we get.
So that gives us six, four, five, seven and three.
Instead of typing out the full type, we can just put auto.
And then the compiler will look at the return type of the begin call and deduce that we want
an iterator to a vector of int.
And there we are, we get exactly the same results.
One important point about auto is that it only gives the bare underlying type.
In this example, the compiler was deducing the type from six. Six is actually a const, but the compiler
deduced that x should be a normal int, variable and not a const.
In fact, when auto is used, any const or reference is ignored.
If we have a function which returns a reference to const, which is perhaps not the greatest interface,
if we use auto to create a variable which captures this return value, then I is going to be an int, not
a const reference to int.
So this will make a copy of the return value, which will be mutable.
If we actually want to have a const reference, then we need to type that in explicitly and then
we have const reference to auto I, and that will cause i to be deduced as a reference to const.
There is actually a way to make the compiler do that in C++ 14, but we are not going to use that in
this course.
So I will not discuss it here.
Another very useful feature is the range for loop. If we want to iterate over the containers, modern
C++ has a special syntax for that.
We have this reduced for loop.
So this will cause the compiler to generate the boilerplate code, which calls begin(), increments the
iterator, and compares it to the result of calling end() and then dereferences the iterator.
So this it in here is actually going to have the type of the element.
And then this is going to be a copy of the vector element so we can just print it out directly without
having to dereference it.
If we want to modify the elements in the vector, then we need to use the reference form of auto.
So this would be an actual reference to the element.
And then if we do something with that in the loop, then that change will be made to the element in
the vector.
So let's look at this.
Here we need the reference because we're going to be modifying the elements. We remove the star,
of course, because now we've got the actual element and not an iterator to it.
OK, let's see if I got that right.
Yes, I have :)
OK, so this is going to go through every element in the vector, we are going to get a reference to
the element and then we can add two to it.
And then in this loop, we're going to get a copy of each element in the vector and we print it out.
So this is very useful in the majority of cases where you want to iterate over every element in the
container in order and you want to visit every element.
Sometimes you may want to do something different.
You may only want to iterate over part of the container or you may want to miss out some elements.
If you're adding or moving elements, then this is not suitable.
In all those cases, you will need to write out a traditional loop, but you will be able to use auto
instead of having to write out the iterator explicitly.
Okay, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!